that's welcome the Oh deGrasse Tyson
alright alright so want to inflate him
so everything we see in the universe the
Stars the planets the galaxies the
plants the rocks the power of us
everything you say it's near the front
of this book is is what you call the
product of a remarkable asymmetry of
matter over antimatter what did you mean
by that
oh can I just say something about your
introduction woman if I may you man so
I'm I'm impressed by your persistent
scepticism of all things I say reporters
hosta you can never really believe you
have to check and verify hmm okay I
guess I had to
you just get you you're right every time
though so far I mean how can I possibly
just come up with that unless it was
correct what that a building kicks off
by the second you're ridiculous
but do we may built the building did you
think well I have a wonderful idea what
it's all we got a half a foot Charles
maybe we'll get a second on the
celestial clock okay
I don't think so yeah no I'm sure it was
not on purpose
it just is as so much of the universe is
so profound a symmetry so you just went
right into the stuff hi there yeah well
okay uh just a quick note yeah that this
title astrophysics for people in a hurry
I've had people joke with me about it
say Oh was Astro physics for dummies
already taken you know and I just wanted
to make it clear that first yes it was
taken but but there's nothing I don't
think there's anything quote dumbed down
about the astrophysics in this book it's
all sort of curated legitimate full up
astrophysics in an attempt to sort of
grant the reader a degree of fluency in
modern astrophysics
like the next morning at the water
cooler you could just be talking about
yeah and like there are things in here I
had never heard of really and you and
you get around I get around yeah you got
around so I'm going to be checked but so
I in the in the early universe the
temperature was very hot and above
certain thresholds of temperature what
happens is matter no longer stays as
matter it can freely move back and forth
between itself and energy and we have
the recipe for this it comes from e
equals mc-squared we all know that
equation it's the formal conversion
recipe for matter and energy and the C
squared is the speed of light square is
a huge number a little bit of mass times
that huge number gives you a lot of
energy we don't experience in our lives
equals MC squared because the energy in
which we're immersed is not high enough
to enable matter to go back and forth
between energy and itself that's why it
took so long to discover equals MC
squared and to come to terms and to come
to understand it but it is a profound
equation that manifests from the
beginning of time
all the way to the future of the
universe but not in our life experience
alright so and also let me preface it by
saying in one of the opening pages of
the book is what you call it the rubric
no the episode what's the beginning no
no I don't you know the publishers have
a word for the maze that has a thing on
it yeah well it since that's the
dedication for all those that's the
dedication or you want to read it okay I
mean for all those who are too busy to
read fat books yet nonetheless seek a
conduit to the cosmos yeah yeah but
that's not what I was looking for you
look it up the teenagers beyond two
pages beyond yeah contents yeah preface
preface okay oh yes the universe is
under no obligation to make sense to you
that's it signed by you the scores can
make that clear so the universe is under
no obligation to make sense to any of us
so I will be saying things and you'll
say that doesn't make sense just
remember what I just said okay okay what
we've learned is that the universe is
what we measure it to be not what we
want it to be not what feels good not
what only has to make sense to our five
senses our five biological senses forged
in the plains of Africa you know a
million years ago a half a million years
ago I would whatever what's the latest
the biologists tell us is those senses
to prevent us from getting eaten by a
lion are very different from what you
need to grasp the universe and so this
is why mathematics is so potent because
it takes us out of our senses and
enables us to still probe the reality of
what the universe is so here's what goes
on if matter and energy can go back and
forth this is how that works I have a
blob of energy and it decides that it
wants to become matter and it does so
all this energy becomes matter but I
mean it decides it goes and then it
thinks what could I like to be today it
happens spontaneously and it depends on
what the temperature is oh okay cool
what's it we get it's hot and then it
gets yeah so if it if the temperature
drops too low then it's not going to
happen energy will stay energy and
whatever matter was around at that time
we'll stay matter so watch what happens
we now have high enough energy that if
you converted up this pocket of energy
into mass equals MC squared you get
enough mass to create particles out of
it okay so get a very low take electron
for example that's very low mass among
atomic subatomic particles so you can
ask how much energy does it take to make
an electron write that number down if
you don't have that much energy around
you
your energy will never become a particle
whoever okay so in the early universe
there was so much energy every particle
could be made so watch what happens you
have a pocket of energy it becomes mass
the only way we know that can happen is
if if it becomes a particle and an
antiparticle pair matter and antimatter
antimatter is the opposite of the first
thing yes in every measurable way huh
okay so the opposite of an electron is a
positron it looks just like an electron
but among other things it has the
opposite charge of an electron positron
okay every particle has an antiparticle
there's a neutron have an anti Neutron
yes there's a proton have an antiproton
yes and so you might say well what's the
opposite charge of a neutron because the
neutron has no charge
the neutron is made of it's made of
quarks that have fractional charges that
cancel each other to get zero net charge
on the neutron so an anti neutron has
all those same quarks but the antimatter
version of those quarks on the inside
what will happen if these two kiss if
you take matter and antimatter and put
them together they annihilate and become
pure energy and the matter disappears
entirely let me delete something over oh
no not even a little
not a light a photon something yes yes
so you take the particles matter
antimatter identical particles other
except that they were matter antennae
bring them together they disappear and
that matter becomes energy and all
that's left is energy right in that
pocket right there
that happens all the time in the center
of the Sun it happened everywhere in the
early universe now here's the rug you
have all these photons of light oh by
the way I have a photon joke can I tell
it tell the thoughts okay
[Laughter]
vote on checks into a hotel it's not a
bar
oh well it can't be racy because the
families are the family I got it okay I
got I got this vote on checks into a
hotel
the bellhop hat comes up and says do you
have any luggage and the photon says no
I'm traveling light
and if the bellhop were here tonight
he'd left a big fat lab yes yes yeah in
the end so when I say pocket of energy
let's just simply refer to photons
because they carry energy all right so a
photon turns into matter it's a matter
antimatter pair matter antimatter come
together they make a photon it's
symmetric okay okay so basic that mean
that if every matter part met every
antimatter part they all would going to
be left with just light yes there would
be no matter in the universe only light
oh okay so now as in let there be light
yes except there's nothing else after
that so sort of a very short store let
there be light and we're done
yeah yeah yeah take that light of
Genesis and start over yeah yeah yeah
yeah that would be a very short Genesis
right there so so you have all this
energy in the form of photons becoming
mattering back and forth and there it
goes as the temperature of the universe
dropped you reach a point where you can
no longer make particles with the energy
you have but you have all these matter
and antimatter particle pairs that
eventually find one another and
annihilate and make a photon but we're
still cooling the universe so according
to our known laws of physics in the
cooling universe every matter and
antimatter particle pair would have
annihilated made of photon the photon
would have cooled and no more matter
would have been made and we would have
had an entire universe of just light but
it is not the universe we occupy
we can start up like a band you know no
no I just I'm saying we apparently are
the exception yes yes so mysteriously we
call it symmetry breaking just because
we don't that's what if what happened
we're just describing what happened not
that we fully understand why it happened
one out of basically a million of these
reactions one out of a million the
photon did not make a matter/antimatter
pair it just made a matter particle it
was the you're trying to find out why
yeah and I'm just saying it is that okay
so one out of about a million makes a
matter particle without the antimatter
counterpart so now the dance card the
dance hall has nine hundred and ninety
nine thousand partners that can pair out
of nine hundred and ninety nine nine
thousand yes well not that one 999 here
and is one left over so everybody else
becomes light and that one has no
antimatter particle two mates with and
it is frozen out of the universe and has
become all the matter that we know and
see today so everything that we are a
profound asymmetry on the early universe
we are the stuff that didn't get a date
correct
doesn't that strike you as an extremely
fragile interpretation of all but there
is I mean it's like being around by the
skinny skinny skin if your chin each
unique you whatever that thing is except
in the concept of multiverse we have
many many universes all the laws of
physics don't have to be the same in
each universe so there could be plenty
of universes wherever the dance card was
full and they just have light in them
and you are not in that universe saying
that it was just a chance of Curren oh
well you are in the universe I'm worried
about the other ones I'm just interested
that our universe the one that we know
and live in is such a fragile
arrangement originally not well it
doesn't have to be it may be but it
doesn't have to be and it is unlikely to
be and can I give an obscure example
that will settle this yeah okay okay
line up a thousand people and give them
a coin and everybody's had flip the coin
and about half will get tails half will
get it if you got tails sit down that's
500 left approximately mm-hmm have them
flip half get heads have it 250 of you
sit down never let go to it do it again
go from 215 to 125 to 60 to 30 15 to 8
to 4 to 2 to 1 okay in this experiments
not it's not an unthinkable experiment
mm-hmm this person who survived this
exercise flipped heads 10 consecutive
times
now here's what journalists do they go
up to that person and they say how do
you feel well I knew I had felt that
heads energy halfway through and I and I
was feeling it and I did they ask anyone
else that they felt up that heads energy
no they only interviewed that guy you
come well I'm not done all right so
that person says boy I was lucky to flip
heads ten consecutive times well every
time essentially every time you do this
experiment somebody's going to flip
heads ten consecutive times so you want
to say oh this is a special universe in
which that happened no no because of the
the nature of this the fact you can have
a thousand experiments happening all the
time there's going to be one where
somebody flips head head ten consecutive
times every time you do this experiment
that does not make it special
just because somebody flips heads take
ten consecutive times every time you do
the experiment so you're in a universe
where this weird thing happens at the
beginning and you want to feel all feel
all heads energy about it and I'm saying
in a multiverse that could be 999
universes where that did not happen and
you're the one that did and you want
special credit for it I'm not giving it
to you alright let me move on to another
thought in the second sort of section of
this book I this is something I hadn't
really occurred to me I mean once it'll
write the book I don't know I know it
doesn't I just meant the next thing I
noticed that one you stand a book up
yeah yeah yeah I do then is that allowed
well if you didn't know it you all get
like a free book tonight did you know
this okay everybody
excuse me just to be clear I signed
every one of your books okay and those
are the the books that are part of that
series if you look on that page that
you're signed there six or seven cities
there I'm going to be each in each one
of those cities giving one talk and all
those books are signed and I'm not
signing any other books but those so
it's a limited edition yeah basically
that's right if you open your book and
you're Nate your signature hissing sure
he's not in there and you're the lonely
one you go up and start speaking of
universes up there there was a time when
people believed that the heavens up
there were the province of God and
whatever was going on in there was
unknowable and it would be basically
sinful to find out you point out that
that with gravity well whether you just
briefly Newton comes along and then
everything changes yeah yes so you look
up and the planets are going forward
against the background stars and then
backwards and we call it there's a word
for that retrograde and they do a
loop-the-loop and nobody understands it
and the fact that no one understands it
it's presented as evidence in some bits
of scholarship as evidence for the
divinity of the heavens because that is
the handiwork of God and we are mortal
and God is immortal and omniscient and
so we can't possibly know the mind of
God
so you just content just in your
ignorance watching planet there was some
attempts at this with the geocentric
epicycles and all this but this was it
was well accepted that you'll never
understand Newton comes along writes
down equations of motion equations of
gravity and kind of on a dare he invents
integral and differential calculus
then he turned 26 this is why Isaac
Newton is my man did it just to make
that clear okay
among many reasons but so he writes down
these equations and he can now
demonstrate full knowledge of how why
and where and what the planets are doing
and so potent was his new theory of
gravity that it worked for moons of
Jupiter orbiting Jupiter not just
planets orbiting the Sun and this was
the first indication maybe this is not
just a local truth that maybe it applies
across the universe and this was a
little bit of heresy bought by some that
in fact Newton was accused by some say
Isaac you've left nothing for God to do
and that's simultaneously a dig at him
but also quite a compliment that he can
actually understand the mind of God well
that's what guys read this is where it
got interesting then you went off I mean
everybody knows that gravity is
apparently is ubiquitous and universal
but then you wouldn't asked about
chemistry and physics constants and and
kindly thought about that before is it
is the chemistry of the Sun and the
chemistry of the earth and the chemistry
of the furthest thing you can think of
are the laws about bonds and pairings
and so the other thing are the same
everywhere without exception it was not
obvious there's not there's no tablet in
the sky that required that the laws of
physics we discover on Earth's surface
would apply elsewhere if they were
different on earth than on the moon and
on a Sun and I suppose we could deal
with that but what a remarkable fact
that it is the same well wait a second
like you've seen that thing on on
Jupiter that's the one that never quits
you're the big red thing the big yeah we
call it the Red Spot on Jupiter we call
it Jupiter's red spot okay
because that's how we roll that thing is
BOTS on the Sun sunspots big feet we
have any geologists or chemists in the
audience geologists but but can you be
jealous of this fact because you guys
name stuff that nobody knows what the
hell you're talking about okay and you
know we're talking it's suspicious to
you that a storm there could go on for
350 years without a break and we never
have storms that go on for 350 years
without a break we don't even have
storms that go on for like six weeks
without a break so first of all these
storms are when we have storms it's in
our atmosphere mmm let's gas yeah we
rotate once a day and so that rotation
creates a what we call a Coriolis force
which moving air air that moves from one
latitude to another actually has its
direction deflected because of this
Coriolis force and this is why storms
rotate in one direction counterclockwise
in the Northern Hemisphere and clockwise
in the southern hemisphere just a quick
aside I I was channel surfing one day
waiting for a movie to come on at the
top of the hour had 15 minutes I hit a
football game and they just ended the
game at a tie and they just started
overtime that's about right let me just
watch this how bad could it be
after the necessary exchange of
possession it became sudden-death
overtime and then one of the teams
Cincinnati Bengals got within 50 yards
and they kicked a field goal and the
ball rotated up it hits the left upright
who love the goalpost and went in and I
said who wait a minute and I said which
stadium is this what's the latitude and
I looked at the orientation of the
stadium I did a calculation and then I
tweeted and I said
they though the overtime winning field
goal by the Cincinnati Bengals was
likely aided by a 1/3 of an inch
deflection to the right imparted by
Earth's rotation look even lost in my
people I'm at the local sports channel
that and and so the point is if if if
you were going north south at all in the
northern hemisphere you will deflect to
the right no matter what you're doing ok
that's that's why you have a
low-pressure system and I'm a ball of
gas below it if it's low pressure there
and I'm air I'm going to head for the
low pressure that's how this works it's
low pressure that means it's higher
pressure out here so all the pressure is
going to send me in that direction but
I'm crossing lines of latitude
and so Earth's rotation will deflect me
to the right now but how about air
that's above it it says I see a low
pressure system let me go to it so goes
to it and it deflects to the right so
all this air deflects to the right but
it's still trying to get to the center
of the low-pressure system but it can't
because it keeps that getting deflected
and all this deflection becomes this
cyclonic energy that turns into a storm
and that is how you get hurricanes
tornadoes it's what he called it
cyclones psyche ok ok so we're back at
cupid if yes we are know what so this
happens in the gasps yeah all right the
Coriolis force is heightened if you spin
faster ok and so what is Jupiter it's a
hundred times bigger than Earth more
than that ten four thousand times bigger
than Earth it's like weather to ten it's
ten times across cubed so it's a
thousand times bigger than Earth it's
mostly gas
and it rotates once in about ten hours
you want to talk about ferocious
Coriolis forces we have storms that last
weeks here hurricanes that pick up and
they get weeks on this little speck we
call earth that has this much atmosphere
on it go to a planet that rotates twice
as fast is ten times as wide a thousand
times the volume and is mostly gas and
you're complaining that it lasted 300
years
you are really good all right let me
I'll grant you that the speed of light
is universal obviously angular momentum
comes of eternity sure what about a big
chapter just gonna be clear he's coming
from a chapter called
on earth as it is in the heavens why you
see can you spontaneously levitate and
hover above the ground in a lotus
position like like Michael Keaton in
Birdman can let me know the beginning of
Birdman his underpants
forget the underpants just the
levitation this for such that your first
thought when you think of someone in a
lotus position Michael Keaton in that
movie yeah ok yeah uh yeah so so it's
just there's certain things you just
can't do because they're prevented by
all known laws of physics you cannot
spontaneously set yourself into motion
unless you push off of something else or
you lose some kind of mass that was
within you so rockets when they take off
their ejecting mass out the other side
okay Wow so do you saw Birdman did you
just leap up to museums it can't do that
can't do that no there are movies where
I'm prepared to suspend my disbelief yes
like just for as an example I was asked
about the movie guardians of the galaxy
and they asked me well the ships that
are going through space they make noise
and clearly you would does that upset
you because in space where there is no
air no one can hear you scream but no
one can hear you explode either nor will
you hear engines or anything and so they
said does that upset you and I said I
bought into the idea that this movie has
a talking raccoon that shoots artillery
from heavy weaponry off its shoulder if
I can accept that I'm good with whatever
else they deliver in the film so I have
the capacity to accept movie magic and
what would happen if someone served you
a hot cocoa with whipped cream and you
see no whipped cream in evidence oh oh
don't get me started okay oh wait wait
let me finish about let me hating right
so all the levites all the people are
levitating that it's some kind of an
illusion that they're not telling you
about okay period here you okay now then
but if you really want to levitate if
this is really important to you
i-i-i tried to calculate how many cans
of beans this would require then you got
to kind of hold it in yeah right
then let loose suddenly suddenly and in
principle for the duration of the thrust
you can levitate briefly but this would
argue against the lotus position because
there would be an opening so suddenly
that there'd be too much too soon
too fast and therefore no rise oh yeah
you wouldn't like you wouldn't well you
could stay there if it just kept yeah
coming that right so it's not impossible
to hold a lotus position
it's just unlikely you're doing it for
these other ways that are described I
said yes the cocoa cocoa oh yeah so I
had to do it was it was an incident in
Pasadena California I was there I don't
drink much coffee I don't have a
relationship with caffeine but every now
and then I'll be delighted to have a
nice cup of hot cocoa and I went to one
of these coffee houses you know with the
chalkboard out front and so I had you
know the kind I'm talking about there's
all over Brooklyn you trip on the
chalkboards in Brooklyn so so I'm in the
I ordered hot chocolate and I ordered it
with whipped cream of course
right and it comes to the table and
there's no whipped cream and I said I
ordered this with whipped cream this is
all we put it on and I said well where
is it oh he said it's sunk to the bottom
I then said either the laws of physics
that apply everywhere in the universe
are suspended in your coffee shop or you
didn't put whipped cream on my hot cocoa
and he looked indignant really now to
his credit rather than continue to argue
with me he intended to prove me wrong
well he went into the kitchen brought
out the the whipped cream scooped it up
popped it in my and my hot cocoa and it
bobbed once and floated atop and there
it was
did your virus which we might owe a
horse whipped cream hats the float
because first of all before was whipped
cream it was cream okay and old-timers
remember what is cream do in
unhomogenized milk it floats to the top
and you skim off the cream leaving
behind skim milk okay this is how that
looks now you take that heavy cream and
then whip it putting air into it it is
not going to sink on any no liquid
devised by man okay
all right so so here's my point the
lesson there is yes I'm I'm a fan of the
edict if an argument last more than five
minutes then both sides are wrong if
that applies maybe 85 percent of the
time it's a good it's a good rule it's a
good tenant to is to carry with you now
watch this how science works one
researcher comes up with a result and
that is not the truth
no no a scientific emergent truth is not
the result of any one experiment what
has to happen is somebody else has to
verify it preferably a competitor
preferably someone who doesn't want you
to be correct such as my waiter he went
out to prove me wrong and got the same
result that I had declared we can call
that the beginnings of an emergent truth
about whipped cream now we need someone
to do it in Asia and in Europe and and
and and then you get a trend and you can
do then declare that a consensus of
observation and experiments has emerged
in the scientific community
whipped cream floats on hot chocolate
and that waiter today is getting a PhD
ah let me go on to to a question that
came up later in the book just how boy D
is the void of space
like so it looks pretty empty out there
between galaxies just a lot of black you
know it seems anyway if you step into
intergalactic space by the way what
might happen to you you die yeah ship
but you might see stuff and this is the
list well I don't I had never heard
anything
Worf galaxies run away stars faint blue
she's hot cause that you let me just ask
about some of them what is a dwarf
galaxy it's a little galaxy well that I
figure didn't we go through this already
our words mean what they say
haven't got but we're past that already
wait what there are galaxies that you
see the ones the Magellan saw smudges in
the sky those are huge things No well
we're dwarf galaxies
those are let's go oh yeah oh oh yeah
they're like a hundredth the size of our
galaxy so how many dwarf they far
outnumber big galaxies they do yes so
maybe we shouldn't be calling them
dwarfs because they're the common size
galaxies we should just be called Giants
perhaps I asked and they call them
regular with the worthy right that's how
that works right
what is the difference how many stars
are in a galaxy galaxy our galaxy has
several hundred billion stars and in a
dwarf galaxy um at most a billion but
more typically hundreds of millions
these are small numbers compared to
full-up red blooded galaxies so tinier
dwarf galaxies and we tend to find them
in the vicinity of big galaxies but you
know what happens you know they orbit
the big galaxies but the orbits are not
stable and they do a death spiral in
they get eaten by the larger galaxies
and we have a term for that
it's called galactic cannibalism in fact
there are stars there streams of stars
that we see in our own galaxy that have
the same trajectory as one another
through the stellar system that is the
Milky Way so they they relate and you
follow it and it comes back out and back
in again and so this is evidence that
this was once a fleshie but dwarfee
galaxies that we ate ripped apart and
now the stars are just trying to have
some last bastions of a memory of what
they once were because they're getting
stretched apart but what we call the
tidal forces of our galaxy is that does
the Milky Way have dwarfs yeah just I
mean has the flow so the first science
essay I ever wrote was called the
galaxies and the Seven Dwarfs because at
the time the Milky Way had seven dwarf
galaxies in orbit
found it and then what dwarf galaxies
are very small they're hard to detect
and since then we've discovered you know
couple dozen more so it might be up
above 22,000 - ARF galaxies in our
vicinity basically nearby
so the point getting back to the void is
you look out on the void you say there's
nothing there well what are you invoking
to declare that it's a void is it your
eyes well let's bring in a telescope or
using visible light is that a visible
light telescope bring in an x-ray
telescope an infrared telescope bring in
the spate of senses that science has
developed that transcend the five native
senses we have through our human
physiology and that power enables us to
decode the universe not as our senses
receive them but as our detectors there
is an amazing chapter of kotas or in the
back where you find out how human beings
finally sensed what they couldn't see
that there is a rainbow of color that we
all can see which are waves of different
lengths they go eat a cue from whatever
it's get beaded bow Roy be viv so
whatever they get Roy beat it Roy had
Roy we had to repeat after me Roy
wrought red Boise Biff wrought red on
yellow green Biff blue indigo indigo the
violent violent you got it but it's
weird I just a quick thing roses are red
violets are violet right
is it me who came up with violence or
blue with that we have a name for that
color that was a desperate poet looking
for a rhyme I think don't be violating
laws of physics just to make the rhyme
okay I was gonna send out Mark Twain's
edik that I love what is it first get
your facts straight then distort them at
your leisure the log let me just finish
this button and I've been command I know
I'm sorry
um at the end there's this this moment
where somebody has to figure out that
that there might be something redder
than red or somehow more than violet now
we only have eyes but this particular
person used a thermometer what was
brilliant it was brilliant brilliant
okay so Isaac Newton is the first to
understand that white light is composed
of colors
he takes white light puts it through a
prism and he gets ROYGBIV actually the
indigo he had a mystical fascination
with the number seven so he wanted to
lay down seven colors with indigo it's
just really blue violet all right okay
but any I will give him his indigo cuz
he did all that stuff before he turned
26 so if you invent calculus just on a
dare we give it to you all right we'll
give you him to go if you need to have
indigo so he's got the colors and then
he took those colors merged them back
together and he got white light out the
other side that's some freaky stuff
that's just freaky yeah that red orange
yellow green blue violet
equals white okay so we're good there
William Herschel comes around later and
says I wonder just to even ask this
question I wonder if the different
colors of light have different
temperatures so he laid down the
spectrum with sunlight prism and he put
a thermometer in each color and then he
had it an eighth thermometer I don't
know if he used one and did the
experiment eight seven times but yet
another thermometer did he used as a
control
thermometer you put that over to the
side where there are no colors and that
would presumably just measure the room
temperature
mmm-hmm so he knows enough to even think
that this is an interesting exercise and
he's got a control thermometer and he
just puts it over to the side of the
read out of sight and then he watches
the two thermometers and the control
thermometer goes through the roof
yes it does and he's looking at it and
he says something must be coming through
this the prism that I cannot see and he
describes this as light unfit for vision
he discovers infrared light with that
experiment and then another guy slip
which the human eye cannot see it's like
if you if you go to the hardware store
and get an infrared bulb you turn it on
and it looks red you're seeing the red
light that is also emitted from this
infrared bulb and the heat that you feel
your eye cannot see that's all the
infrared that you're buying when you pay
money for that bulb and then some other
guy put a piece of paper on the other
side of violet and it turned dark and he
photographed a photographic paper and he
found that it responds it's responded in
the way you would normally respond by
putting photographic paper in front of
visible light so he concludes that was
somebody else somebody else yes right
and says there's something beyond the
light there's something less than the
red infrared something beyond the violet
and thus was discovered ultra violet
light and so to pose the question in the
first place was a stroke of brilliance
to then trust your measurements on a
level where you then declare you have
made that discovery is a whole other
thing it's okay yeah it's yeah here's
the thing about this book I just because
I miss all this what just so people get
a sense of the history yeah a history of
puzzlement and the history of discovery
rolled up into one I'm not going to ask
anything else because it's time for
questions and answers but I would have
so just you know what else is in here
there's something there's dark matter
which is this mysterious thing that's
out there which with dark matter is
everywhere okay the dark energy one of
the questions yes is why are so many
heavenly bodies round is there anything
in the universe that's perfectly round
what's going on between planets where
why is there still debris coming in when
the earth is seem to have scooped up
everything after 4.6 billion rotations
something at the end called the
Copernican principle all of it is really
but never mind
you just let will turn on the light
here's what we're going to ask you if
you can to just raise a hand I'll choose
you and then wow you are then quechua
smash I'll choose you and then you just
stand up and ask and I'll repeat the
question so people in the streaming part
of the world can hear this okay the
question is the universe is 14 something
something billion years old we've now
seen stars stars galaxies galaxies that
are 13 billion years old and somehow
that might suggest that the the universe
is expanding and that there is more and
more universe all the time well first of
all the universe is expanding and there
is more and more observable universe all
the time the universe at its edge is
expanding at one light-year per year
that's how that works and so in a
billion years the edge is not going to
be 14 billion light years away at least
15 billion light years away so we got
that okay so now galaxies 13 billion
light years away we are seeing light
emitted by that galaxy and that light
has been traveling for 13 billion years
okay yes that galaxy emitted its light
when the universe was 10
percent its current age and in fact was
much smaller than it is today now you
said the current paradigm is 14 billion
year age of the universe you said that
with a little bit of oh you'll come up
with something different later
the proper way to say that is that is
the current measurements of the age of
the universe that's how that works
okay paradigm is we came into our
lexicon in a big way in the 1970s with a
book written by the science philosopher
Thomas Kuhn what's it there's a
dangerous woman in here who is this
joker speaks so dangerously remember
what happened to the guy who put the
didn't put the cream in the coffee so
this book the structure of scientific
revolutions sort of introduced paradigm
as a as a as a way that scientists sort
of gather around a paradigm and they all
sort of accepted although then something
different happens and better data comes
along that we all gather around a
different paradigm that happened
basically until the dawn of the age of
modern science which I date from Galileo
and and bacon Francis Bacon where when
you experimentally measure something to
be true and it's verified that is a
truth that does not later turn out to be
false period it's not how science works
it's not like oh this is now definitely
false now let's all crowd around this
you would be left with that impression
having read that book but the book got
that very wrong for the age of modern
science before then sure because people
have thought stuff up and then and call
themselves scientists and that was with
philosophers and you turn out to be
profoundly wrong when somebody else
thought up something better and then
everybody's wrong when we finally
started taking data
it's all about the data okay so
everything you described is just
perfectly fine yes it founds galaxies
the next telescope the James Webb Space
Telescope is tuned to live in that
regime to find galaxies being born in
the early universe so to be a whole lot
more data coming back from the early
universe when that telescope gets
launched lands at its observing point
and gets turned on so there's nothing
you said that's odd or weird that is the
universe we live in
no you don't get to you don't get to a
lot of people oh he's no he's verifying
that I let off with the universe is
under no obligation to make sense to you
yes yeah okay how about upstairs is
there anybody up here I can well you're
not upstairs but I'll mr. cat they asked
you yeah okay well in a second just yell
next time green cat first yes I think
you'd have a great game a plaid cat oh
wow okay thank you I don't think sinful
is the word it's just uh it's it's clear
that's maybe the word
okay question there's people there's he
heard something he talked about God on
CBS television and he's had he's like
thinking about near-death experiences
and he wonders whether these deep
mysteries are interesting to you okay so
one of the things we know from research
in psychology as well as just practical
matters in the conducting of scientific
experiments is that one of the lowest
forms of evidence you could possibly
invoke is eyewitness testimony which is
odd because it's one of the highest
forms of evidence in the court of law
which disturbs me greatly mm-hmm so if
you cut if you come from a lab to a
science conference and say this is true
we say how do you know this because I
saw it that's really the end of your
talk and you just leave and then we say
come back when you have a chart recorder
or you have to just give me something
that does not have to flow through your
senses because your senses is some of
the worst data taking devices that exist
and science did not achieve maturity
modern science does not receive maturity
until we had instruments that either
extended our senses or replace them and
Galileo is not an accident that we have
modern science as I've described it
experiment verification this these
tactics these methods and tools began
with Galileo and Francis Bacon and
Galilei was around 1600 that was the
invention in that period of the
microscope and the telescope so it's not
an accident that all this sort of came
together at that time so now we have
people who are in the act of dying and
they come back from life and they report
on mental experiences and that's
intriguing it's intriguing but because
it is in the realm of eyewitness
testimony
you can establish it perhaps as a
personal truth but it will take more
than that to establish it as an
objective truth and an objective truth
is the kind of truths that science
discovers and it's the kind of truth
that is true whether or not you believe
in it okay it exists outside of your
culture your religion your political
affiliation personal truths if I may
consider that would be okay Jesus is
your Savior that's your personal truth
you cannot convince someone else that
Jesus is their Savior in an objective
way you have to persuade them you have
to persuade them and some with in some
cases by war right look at the wars that
have been fought between religions that
did not agree about who was their
respective saviors so so I'm sure we
hello I walked on water made you unblind
turned got created loaves and fishes out
of nothing that would be a maze I think
we would like investigate that and we
would sit we would say whoa
let yes we would we would so it would be
an amazing thing and then if we if we
cannot account for that for by any other
known laws of physics and it's only
happening with you that we see we'd
wonder if you were like alien or
something first
right but no it would be so easy to
demonstrate divinity if in fact you had
the power you wanted to display but
getting back to the gentleman's point so
part of this issue is what does it mean
to be dead okay it used to be did you
fog a mirror that was held up in front
of you while you were laying there on
your bed all right and if you didn't fog
the mirror you were judged to be dead
they would put you in a coffin and in
some parts that it is told there's a
string that they put into the coffin as
they buried you and they put it over a
tree branch and connected to a bell
if you woke up you would pull the string
and you that's where you get the term
dead ringer okay you would pull the
string and you come rescue me because
you buried a living person okay so then
it was you dead because your heart stops
well we know why our heart beats its
electrochemical so you do poke the heart
beats again we got that one okay well is
it when you're brain dead well you can
be brain dead but your heart is still
beating and if we can keep you alive are
you dead yet
well no cuz your heart still beating is
your brain functioning no okay I can
tell you this that if you're dead long
enough so your brain is deprived oxygen
and then you we bring you back you're
not talking about seeing any lights
because you're brain dead okay so plus
this often happens to someone who is
deathly ill to begin with and where are
they they're in a hospital and if they
go into cardiac arrest or something
critical they take you from your
hospital bed to an operating table and
what is sitting above an operating table
lights bright lights okay and so if you
say oh I was dead and I came back and I
saw lights we maybe it's not all the
cases but it's many of the cases okay
now do skeptics who tried to do an
experiment they're people who say they
left their body hmm and they thought we
got some of those Montesquiou so here's
what they did when was Montesquieu he
got rear-ended by some guy in a horse
fell off flew up into the air looked
down at himself in agony watched his
wife wait we're in collisions in the air
Montaigne Montaigne sorry Montaigne not
till they have rear-end collisions in
the air well you ride a horse with a guy
behind you is riding two fans like a cab
situation okay I didn't know that okay
okay so I didn't know that well I loved
stopping you mid rear-end collision
little horses where was I so so there
was an experiment so there's some
descriptions that are part of this
near-death experience a literature where
they come above and they see themselves
down there on the bed okay
so what they decided to do is for people
who are about to die they would write a
message facing upwards to the ceiling
above the bed and suspend it there so if
a person goes above their bed and looks
down they'd be able to read the message
so they rejoin their body they what they
should then tell us what message they
saw that's never happen no that's enough
now now I have a cousin who when her
father died was alone with him in the
room and he's in an open casket and
she's otherwise completely rational okay
I'm not saying this a crazy person -
completely what she's a real estate
agent so okay thanks for itself okay
among other town okay so she's in there
she tells me of a conversation she had
with her dead father and I said was it
in your mind no he sat up and spoke to
her I said what was the conversation and
she said well he asked he said don't
worry about him he's in a better place
this sort of thing so this is her
eyewitness testimony I'm not going to
say it's wrong I'm just saying it's not
scientifically useful that's all I'm
really saying here okay
I told her next time this happens ask
these questions and not those questions
okay don't say are you happy
did you how you know saying are you
wearing clothes okay where are you where
did you get your clothes what
temperature is it are you just asked
questions like this is this is an
amazing scientific experiment you could
be performing so so that's my lesson to
all of you didn't find yourself in that
situation okay kind of a dead person
sits up and starts talking to me
oh my god but my iphone is coming out
I'm getting charged for quarters I'm I'm
going to be all up in that as an
experiment okay all right up in the
balcony whoever that was yes yeah
question is can you help us understand a
multi-dimensional universe what would be
the dimensions we are unaware of any
dimension higher than the three that
we're familiar with or the actual four
that we're embedded in we live in a
four-dimensional world and that might
sound a little flaky freaky but consider
the following fact you have never met
someone at a place unless it was also at
a time and you have never met someone at
a time unless it was also at a place
that requires four
mentions of nama what about in a dream
this is the dream happening inside your
head yes I don't know when so the only
point is we know intuitively that we
need four dimensions to localize someone
to meet up with them especially well
only two dimensions if you don't have
tall buildings you have 12 buildings you
need the third dimension so you don't
say I'll meet you at the 20th floor of
you know on 721 Park Avenue what time
okay this is a full four dimensions
going on there
so just somewhat a convention we live in
a four-dimensional world for that reason
okay it may be that these four
dimensions are manifest to us but that
in fact we are embedded in higher than
in a higher dimensional space and
strength theorists on the frontier of
this exercise are hypothesizing at least
ten dimensions to account for everything
we see in the universe even if we do not
directly measure those dimensions
themselves now with your permission may
I go on a dimensional journey with you
man might take you on a journey a
dimensional Odyssey honestly are you
ready yes okay are you ready to get
ready for this okay
so I'm at my desk and the desk is a
surface okay and I start putting pages
down on the desk of tiling them on the
desk and then I run out of room I have
exhausted to two dimensions of the
surface of my desk we have ways of
accommodating this problem and so we
have page organizers that go upwards so
now when I don't have any more surface
area of the desk I can enter a third
dimension and put pages there if you are
an ant embedded in this two-dimensional
world of the surface of my desk and you
fill up the desk with these sheets of
paper the ant will say there is no more
room and I say yes there is watch me and
I take a piece of paper off the desk put
it in the page organizer and according
to the ant that's embedded into two
dimensions that page disappeared it
disappeared into a dimension that ant
does not have access to what a brilliant
invention this is you can put
practically an unlimited number of pages
but far more pages above the desk than
on the desk so access to a third
dimension is an extraordinarily useful
storage device for a two-dimensional
creature does the ant trust you that
what it cannot see is nevertheless there
I have to then talk to it about this
extra dimension and then it will have to
just trust you yes because watch what
happens next I now have my
three-dimensional room and I'm filling
it with boxes now I've run out of space
to put the boxes but now an alien four
dimensional alien looks at us and says
I got this just move it into the fourth
dimension what are you talking about and
the alien comes in reaches in takes one
of the boxes and then the Box disappears
disappears it went into a fourth
dimension and this was captured in the
film Monsters Inc did you guys see the
film these are monsters that work in a
door Factory and they make these doors
and they open the door and it is the
door of the kids bedroom or their closet
and they've step through and they're in
the kid's closet and then they scare the
kid because that's their job they're
monsters okay this doorway is a portal
through the fourth dimension and then
back to the third so imagine a new
storage system we just go to Home Depot
and buy a door and that door is your
portal to a fourth dimension you open
the door put your boxes close the door
you look on the other side of the door
there's nothing there so this is what's
going on when you have access to higher
dimensions wait don't you have to then
talk to somebody as far as you know if
you're a scientist and you need data
what you have is something that you had
it's gone and now a voice says I've got
this yeah if that what data it was a
voice from the fourth dimension I'm
going to listen to it
so does everything I'm not going to say
no you're a lie i if if there's a voice
coming out of the fourth dimension and
makes one of my boxes disappear I'm
thinking it's got more power than I do
and more knowledge of the space-time
continuum so I'm going with it does that
mean that in order for scientists to
credit another dimension with reality
with real existence it will need a
testifier from beyond so you need a
dimension plus a dimension dimension
voice demand a dimension a dimensionless
voice yeah that comes from another from
another place now there are things that
happen in quantum physics that kind of
defy our sensibilities like particles
pop in and out of existence they don't
they defy any rational attempt to
understand it particles can be entangled
with one another a particle can be here
and there's a barrier and it can
spontaneously show up on the other side
of the barrier at faster than the speed
of light all of this is just mysterious
let me ask you suppose you have a sphere
and I live in a 2-dimensional world and
you take this hollow sphere so it's a
shell and you pass that sphere through
my two-dimensional universe
how will I describe that I will say this
point just appeared out of nowhere
oops now it's a circle a small circle
and that circle is getting bigger by the
moment oh my gosh well if we study
maximum size now that circle is just
shrinking it's shrinking up now it's a
point now the whole thing disappeared
this will be completely freaky to a two
dimensional being but it makes complete
sense if you live in three dimensions
and you passed a sphere through my
universe so who is to say that some of
the mysterious things we are describing
accurately but don't otherwise make
sense make sense in a higher dimension
and these are just the manifestations of
higher dimensional phenomena in our
world
and that's an aspect of what these
higher dimensional physicists are trying
to establish at this point I want to
totally blow their minds if I can oh if
I may but you got to stay with me on
this okay
we'll all Upper East Siders so you got
this you ready okay these are not all
Upper East so haha era suspiciously um
Upper East Side people littering the
room okay
but you got to stay with me okay a point
has no dimensions there's no height
width depth so it has zero dimensions a
line has one dimension length okay a
square has two dimensions so the height
and width a cube has three dimensions
height width depth we got this
now follow me a line is one dimensional
but it's bounded by two zero dimensional
things those are the points one
dimension bounded by two zero
dimensional points
a square is two dimensions bounded by
four
one-dimensional sides a cube is three
dimensions bounded by six
two-dimensional sides so in other words
the dimensions of your sides are going
up your line is bound by zero
dimensional points your square is bound
by two-dimensional lines I mean by by um
by one-dimensional sides the cube is
bound by two dimensional squares okay so
we going up to four six two points
four sides of a square six sides of a
cube and each side is one dimension less
they're squares on the sides of a cube
they're lines on the side of a square
they're dots on the sides of a line
let's go up to a four dimensional cube a
four-dimensional cube has eight sides a
regular cube has six sides we're going
up by two a four dimensional cube has
eight sides and each of those sides is a
three dimensional cube one dimension
down from itself in the same way each
side of a three-dimensional cube is a
two-dimensional square so when you get
to four dimensions the sides are three
dimensional surfaces and you can take
this all the way up and our brains can't
picture what we call a hypercube in some
circles a tesseract
we can't picture a volume bounded by
three-dimensional cubes what does it
even mean this is because we evolved in
the plains of Africa just not wanting to
get eaten by a lion
our neuro synapses are ill-equipped to
do to do the distance on this and this
is why we invent mathematics that can
take us there
well the mathematics can help us imagine
it but if we want to credit it with
reality then you have to design an
experiment that somehow touches your own
world yes
yes so you can invent something that you
can't see if it has testable
consequences in ways that you can see
that's perfectly allowed not a problem
oh and by the way there's some people
that say you cannot prove a negative
some people like coming after so you
generally won't hear a scientist say
that it's others like philosophers and
people who like criticizing scientists
but who are not scientist so that you
can't prove a neck we kind of do that
all the time
okay but we don't use the word proof we
demonstrate without any further
discussion that the negative is true
okay so here's an example there's a cave
there is there a bear in the cave I
don't know I'm not going in to find out
okay I'm going to set up cameras and see
if a bear comes out okay
so I set up the cameras all throughout
summer no bear goes in and out but then
I
okay then I take down the camera maybe a
bear went in there to hibernate so
here's what you do you set up powder
outside of the cave something that will
record a footprint and you just monitor
this month after month after month after
month do it for 12 months look up in the
charts how often a bear has to eat and
how long would take a bear to die for
not eating if the period of time you
waited is long enough so that there are
no footprints you conclude that there is
no bear in that cave I just demonstrated
a negative sufficient enough for me to
no longer pose that question and go on
to another problem but if you were so
distracted that it's not a formal proof
of a negative then you could just keep
sitting there wondering while the rest
of us decode the nature of the universe
we have a for the last bear in the cave
but I guess let's see oh by the way
maybe the cave is not a closed cave he
might have a rear but wait have a back
door yeah okay that's possible I suppose
that's possible so then the assumption
that there's no bear in the cave would
be wrong but I'm or the cave could have
a cave and that cave could have another
cave you see there is just so much to
worry about right and so you will sit
there you'll sit there arrested by your
own capacity to doubt an experimental
reality yes
well like I said the recipes that we
keep making discovery well we need we
have time for one more question and that
person at the very end underneath the
exit sign hands prominently raised not
the one waving it that the woman in the
yellow shirts still with their hand up
and wondering if I'm looking at her
yellow looking back and what's not a
yellow shirt that's it it's a horizontal
striped shirt oh okay really oh oh
repeat it but this was an art major or
something I'm right I guess yeah if you
had one last question to answer this
evening what would that question be uh
so you you you misunderstand me uh oh
that wasn't your question what good what
can I at least answer that no okay oh
you're in your career as a scientist if
there is one question that you wish to
address before you go to the great cave
with the bear or wait forever for the
bear to come out and stay there what
would that science question be or do you
like your previous question better uh
yeah okay so I'm going to give an answer
but then I want your permission to give
you a kind of a cop-out answer
I'll give both a full answer and then a
cop-out answer that my full answer is I
wonder if in fact the human intellect is
sufficient to actually decode the full
operations of this universe in which we
live and it's not specifically an
Astrophysical question it's just more
we are intelligent species because we
defined ourselves that way
we don't have the benefit of another
species to compare ourselves with
against whom we might fail miserably and
so when we compare ourselves to chimps
we sit up righteously and say we have
poetry and the Hubble telescope and
philosophy and the trim just stacks
banette stacks boxes to reach a banana
yet there's only 1% difference in our
DNA but then you'll say what a
difference that 1% makes and I would say
maybe that 1% DNA difference corresponds
with an equally small difference in the
intelligence between a chimp and humans
and you say I can't believe that no no
well imagine some other species that
visits us that's 1% along on that same
scale smarter than us consider the
smartest chimp does what our toddlers
can do and there's no way you will
explain to a chimp all of dinner ready
at 6:30 if you pick up some sub juice on
the way home that the simplest human
thoughts are inconceivable to a chimp
and their talents are about what our
toddlers can do so let's get back to
this 1% smarter alien that we've
discovered corresponding this analogy we
now say what would we look like to them
well they would roll Stephen Hawking
forward after combing the human species
and they'd say this one is slightly
smarter than the rest because he can do
astrophysics calculations in his head
like little Timmy over here but who just
came home from preschool Oh Timmy you
just composed three sonnets isn't that
cute let's put it up on the refrigerator
door oh you just derived the fundamental
law of calculus isn't that kid put it up
on the refrigerator their simplest
thoughts would transcend our deepest
thoughts and
maybe they to them it is obvious what
dark matter is and dark energy maybe to
them particles popping in and out of
existence is a trivial exercise in their
understanding of the multi-dimensional
space-time continuum and we are here
groping at the sides of a wall not
knowing how tall wide or deep it is
because we have the limits of the human
physiology evolved off the plains of
Africa just to try to understand the
entire universe
so I lose sleep on that question each
night so that's my way did you almost
say at the beginning of that answers
that you are wondering we may be
something of a mysterion that you you
you're not sure I'm not sure the world
is so the universe is so complicated
that it may be more complicated than we
can ever that no that's the hubristic
way to say it it's not how I said it
okay how did you say it again we might
not be smart enough okay not your Brist
'ok if you're hubristic you would say we
are smart but the universe is just
really complicated that's not what I
said well I said we might not be smart
enough to figure out a universe that
could be trivial to the brain of a more
intelligent species okay so check your
hubris at the door otherwise you're you
will not bask in the cosmic perspective
that so much of this discussion brings
upon us so may I now give you my cop-out
answer my cop-out answer is I think
often about the questions we do not yet
know to ask because discoveries yet to
come but when they arrive will put us in
a new Vista a new place to stand
enabling us to see questions undreamt of
and unimaginable when I again lay awake
at night I ponder what kinds of
questions lay beyond our reach
because the questions that we even know
how to pose they're there those are not
even interesting to me anymore because
we knew how to ask the question I want
to know the question that is beyond
everyone's reach and by definition I
can't because we haven't gotten there
yet but that doesn't mean I shouldn't
dream of that frontier and
that sounded like a coda to me I gotta
say I could hear the orchestra playing
yeah huh
can man offer a better coda yes and then
we'll let you go but I we've been here
long sorry we went long try not to ever
forget that the history of this exercise
this beautiful exercise where we find
out where we fit in this great unfolding
of cosmic events and phenomenon that the
larger grows the area of knowledge the
bigger that area grows just to remember
so - grows our perimeter of ignorance it
may be that as much as we think we know
as much as we know we know as much as
the more things that we ultimately learn
for all we know we could be steeped in
the center of infinite ignorant which
then provides job security forever for
scientists sorry Robert Chloe you're
right
you